.\" PROTEL 2026 manual — Vincente D'Ingianni
.TH Pb 1 "June 2026" "PROTEL 2026" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
Pb \- PROTEL source beautifier (keyword uppercasing)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B Pb
[\fIoptions\fR]
[[\fB\-\fR]
.I input
]
[[\fB\-\fR]
.I output
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Pb
is the PROTEL 2026 beautifier. It performs lexical analysis on PROTEL
source and uppercases reserved keywords to match the style of the
PROTEL Reference Manual and historical Nortel/BNR listings.
.PP
.B Pb
is a filter\-style tool: it reads from standard input and writes to
standard output by default, and supports shell redirection, pipes, and
explicit input/output file arguments.
.PP
Non\-keyword identifiers, numeric literals, operators, and whitespace
are preserved exactly. Keywords inside
.B %
comments or inside
.B \(aq...\(aq
string literals are not altered.
.PP
Lines beginning with
.B $LI
(linker directives) are uppercased in full.
.PP
A first\-line UNIX shebang
.RI ( #!... )
is copied unchanged to the output so runnable
.B .P
programs keep their
.B Pc!
interpreter line (see
.BR Pc (1)).
.PP
If very few recognized keywords are found,
.B Pb
emits a warning on standard error but still produces output.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-bold
Wrap uppercased keywords in ANSI bold escape sequences
.RI ( \(rs033[1m " ... " \(rs033[0m )
for terminals that support bold text.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the
.B Pb
version
.RI ( Pb " 1.0 (PROTEL Beautifier)" )
and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I input
Source file to beautify. Defaults to standard input
.RB ( \- ).
Use
.B \-
explicitly to read from standard input when an output file is given.
.TP
.I output
Destination file. Defaults to standard output
.RB ( \- ).
Use
.B \-
explicitly to write to standard output when an input file is given.
.SH BEHAVIOR
.B Pb
tokenizes the source and matches tokens against the official PROTEL
reserved\-word list (Reference Manual Appendix A, derived from historical
.B oflpr
/
.B oflpi
sources). Matching tokens are forced to UPPERCASE.
.PP
Comment lines start with
.BR % .
String literals use single quotes; an embedded quote is written as two
single quotes
.RI ( \(aq\(aq ).
.PP
In GNU Emacs,
.B Pb
may be invoked on the current buffer via
.B C\-c C\-f
.RI ( M-x protel\-beautify ;
see Introductory Manual \(S7.2).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Input or output file error.
.SH EXAMPLES
Beautify a file in place (via a second file):
.PP
.RS
.B Pb examples/Hello.P build/Hello.pretty.P
.RE
.PP
Filter from standard input:
.PP
.RS
.B Pb \-\-bold < myprog.P > myprog.pretty.P
.RE
.PP
Pipe through a pager:
.PP
.RS
.B Pb < myprog.P | less
.RE
.PP
Copy input path to output path:
.PP
.RS
.B Pb myprog.P myprog.pretty.P
.RE
.PP
Bold keywords on standard output:
.PP
.RS
.B cat myprog.P | Pb \-\-bold
.RE
.SH INSTALLATION
After
.BR "make install\-system" ,
.B Pb
is available as
.IR /usr/local/bin/Pb
(symlink to
.IR /usr/local/protel/Pb ).
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR Pc (1),
.BR protel-mode
(Emacs),
Introductory Manual \(S7.0.1,
\(S7.2.
.SH AUTHORS
Vincente D'Ingianni \(em PROTEL 2026 revival project (original
.B Pb
from the 1990s, recreated 2026).
.SH COPYRIGHT
PROTEL \(co Vincente D'Ingianni / Binary Systems.