.\" PROTEL 2026 manual — Vincente D'Ingianni
.TH Pc 1 "June 2026" "PROTEL 2026" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
Pc \- PROTEL 2026 compiler (parser, transpiler, and GCC/clang++ driver)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B Pc
[\fIoptions\fR]
.I input
[\fIinput\fR ...]
[\fB\-\-\fR \fIprogram\-args\fR ...]
.PP
.B Pc!
.I script.P
[\fIprogram\-args\fR ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Pc
is the PROTEL 2026 compiler driver. It parses PROTEL source, performs
strong type checking, transpiles to C++ (or C with
.BR \-\-emit\-c ),
and optionally invokes
.BR g++ ,
.BR clang++ ,
or
.BR c++
to produce object files or executables.
.PP
On first use,
.B Pc
bootstraps a private Python virtual environment
.RI ( .venv )
in the PROTEL project tree and installs parser dependencies (Lark).
.PP
The default source suffix is
.BR .P
(historical Nortel/BNR convention). The compiler does
.I not
require any particular extension; recognized suffixes are
.BR .P ,
.BR .protel ,
.BR .pt ,
.BR .ptl ,
and PLS edition suffixes
.B .AA01
through
.BR .ZZ99 .
Unrecognized names still compile when the file contains valid PROTEL source.
.PP
PLS edition files (for example
.IR vdi.aa01 )
automatically enable classical preprocessing (keyword normalization;
.B $LI
and
.B $EJECT
linker directives stripped before parse) even without
.BR \-\-classical .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-output " " \fIfile\fR
Write generated C/C++ source, an object file, or an executable to
.IR file .
When
.I file
ends in
.B .c
or
.BR .cpp ,
only source is emitted. Otherwise, an
.BR \-\-output
name that does not end in
.B .c
or
.B .cpp
implies compile/link mode.
.TP
.B \-\-classical
Use legacy PROTEL identifier rules (keywords remain UPPERCASE).
Automatically enabled for PLS edition suffixes.
.TP
.B \-\-parse\-only
Parse the source and print an abstract-syntax summary to standard error;
do not transpile or compile.
.TP
.B \-\-emit\-c
Emit C instead of C++ (default output is C++). Compile and link modes
require C++ output; do not combine
.B \-\-emit\-c
with
.BR \-\-compile ,
.BR \-\-run ,
or
.BR \-c .
.TP
.B \-\-compile
Transpile and compile to a native executable or object file.
.TP
.B \-\-run
Compile and run the program (implies
.BR \-\-compile ).
The process exit status is the integer returned by the ENTRY procedure,
or the shell status of the generated executable.
.TP
.BR \-c
Compile only: produce an object file (passed through to the C++ compiler).
.TP
.BR \-g
Generate debug information (passed through to the C++ compiler).
.TP
.B \-\-keep
Retain the generated
.B .cpp
(or
.BR .c )
file after compiling. By default, intermediate source in
.I build/
is removed once linking succeeds.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the
.B Pc
version
.RI ( Pc " 0.3.0" )
and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.SH PROGRAM ARGUMENTS
When
.B \-\-run
is used, arguments intended for the PROTEL ENTRY procedure may follow a
.B \-\-
separator:
.PP
.RS
.B Pc
.I source.P
.B \-\-run \-\-
.I arg1 arg2 ...
.RE
.PP
These are forwarded to
.IR argc / argv
in the ENTRY procedure (Introductory Manual \(S5.5.2).
.SH MODES
.TP
.B Transpile only (default)
With no compile flags and no executable
.BR \-o ,
generated C++ is written to standard output.
.TP
.B Transpile to file
.B Pc
.I source.P \-o
.I out.cpp
writes generated source only.
.TP
.B Compile / link
.BR \-\-compile ,
.BR \-\-run ,
.BR \-c ,
or
.B \-o
naming a non\-source output triggers compilation. Generated C++ is written
under
.I build/
unless
.B \-o
names a
.B .cpp
path. The minimal I/O runtime
.RI ( src/runtime/protel_io.c )
is linked when needed. Default executable name is
.BR a.out .
.TP
.B Multiple inputs
More than one
.I input
file may appear on the command line; only the first is compiled. A warning
is issued for additional files.
.SH "SHEBANG RUNNER (Pc!)"
.B Pc!
(pronounced
.I "P c Bang" )
is a companion helper installed alongside
.BR Pc .
The exclamation mark echoes the
.B \(lq#!\(rq
.I shebang
convention and provides a short command\-line alias for running programs.
.PP
.B Pc!
is equivalent to:
.PP
.RS
.B Pc
.I script.P \-\-run \-\-
[\fIprogram\-args\fR ...]
.RE
.PP
Typical shebang line in an executable
.B .P
file:
.PP
.RS
.B #!/usr/bin/env Pc!
.RE
.PP
Requirements for direct execution:
.IP \(bu 3
Line 1 must be a UNIX shebang naming
.BR Pc! .
.IP \(bu 3
The file must be executable
.RI ( chmod +x ).
.IP \(bu 3
The PROTEL project directory must be on
.BR PATH
so
.B Pc!
and
.B Pc
are found.
.PP
Examples:
.PP
.RS
.nf
export PATH="$PWD:$PATH"
./examples/Hello.P
Pc! examples/Hello.P
Pc! examples/intro_5_5_2_args_exit.P one two
.fi
.RE
.PP
The preprocessor strips the shebang before parse; it is not PROTEL syntax.
.SH INSTALLATION
.TP
.B System\-wide (default)
.RS
.nf
sudo make install-system
.fi
.RE
Installs the toolkit under
.IR /usr/local/protel ,
symlinks
.BR Pc ,
.BR Pb ,
and
.B Pc!
into
.IR /usr/local/bin ,
and installs manual pages in
.IR /usr/local/share/man/man1/ .
.TP
.B Local checkout
.RS
.nf
make install
.fi
.RE
Prepares the source tree for development (local
.I .venv
and
.I man/man1/ ).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B PATH
Must include
.IR /usr/local/bin
after a system install, or the PROTEL checkout directory during
development, so
.B Pc
and
.B Pc!
can be located by the shell and by
.BR "env" .
Quoted
.B \(lq~/PROTEL\(rq
in
.B PATH
does not expand; use
.BR $PWD ,
.BR $HOME/PROTEL ,
or an absolute path.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/local/protel/
Default system\-wide toolkit root
.RI ( SYSPREFIX ;
see
.BR make install\-system ).
Contains
.BR Pc ,
.BR Pb ,
.BR Pc! ,
.IR src/ ,
.IR examples/ ,
.IR emacs/ ,
and
.IR .venv/ .
.TP
.I .venv/
Python virtual environment (created at install time or on first local run).
.TP
.I build/
Default directory for generated
.B .cpp
files during compilation (under the toolkit root or current working
directory).
.TP
.I src/runtime/protel_io.c
Minimal EXTERNAL I/O runtime linked by default.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Parse, type, transpile, compile, or I/O error.
.TP
.B >0
When
.B \-\-run
is used, the ENTRY procedure return value or program exit status.
.SH EXAMPLES
Transpile to standard output:
.PP
.RS
.B Pc examples/Hello.P
.RE
.PP
Compile and run:
.PP
.RS
.B Pc examples/Hello.P \-\-run
.RE
.PP
Named executable and ENTRY arguments:
.PP
.RS
.B Pc examples/intro_5_5_2_args_exit.P \-o build/ArgsExit \-\-run \-\- one two
.RE
.PP
Object file (PLS module):
.PP
.RS
.B Pc vdi.aa01 \-c \-o build/vdi.aa01.o
.RE
.PP
Keep generated C++ for inspection:
.PP
.RS
.B Pc myprog.P \-\-compile \-\-keep \-o build/myprog
.RE
.PP
Classical (legacy) identifiers:
.PP
.RS
.B Pc legacy.P \-\-classical \-\-run
.RE
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR Pb (1),
.BR protel-mode
(Emacs),
Introductory Manual \(S7.0,
\(S7.1,
\(S7.0.5,
Reference Manual \(S11.3 (type errors),
.IR docs/reference-error-messages.md
.SH AUTHORS
Vincente D'Ingianni \(em PROTEL 2026 revival project.
.SH COPYRIGHT
PROTEL \(co Vincente D'Ingianni / Binary Systems.